import LayoutMain from '../layout-main.jsx';
import PostHeader from './header';
export const meta = {
  date: '2019-02-04T16:00:00Z',
  title: 'Clean Code âœ¨',
  author: 'Douglas Bouttell'
};
export const layout = (props) => <LayoutMain title={meta.title} {...props} />;

<PostHeader {...meta} />

Hello Internet.

After reading a rather
[useful book by Kevlin Heany](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/0596809484) on variety
of subjects including this one. I thought that since I have been doing this
thing called "being a software developer" for almost 6 years now I would dump
some of my knowledge here in the hopes of making the world of Software
Development a better place.

## What is Clean Code?

#### Clean code explains itself

Compare these two code snippets:

```c
int ext(char* s, char* a) {
  int i = 0;
  for (; *s; s++)
    if (*s == '.') {
      s++;
      while(i++, *a++ = *s++);
      return i;
    }
  return i;
}
```

versus

```c
#define SEPARATOR '.'

/**
 * Get the extension of the filename, from the first separator
 * @param filename the filename to search over
 * @param result a string pointer to store the result
 * @returns the number of bytes copied, or 0 if nothing is copied
 */
void getFileExtension(char* filename, char* result) {
  int len = strlen(filename);
  for (int offset = 0; offset < len; ++offset) {
    if (filename[offset] == SEPARATOR) {
      strncpy(result, filename, offset + 1);
      return offset - len - 1;
    }
  }
  return 0;
}

```

Which one do you think is cleaner? I would say the second one is.

Even though the first example is correct and I can _guess_ what it does fairly
easily, the second example it is more _explicit_ what you are trying to achieve.
This is achieved with a clearer function name, typing information, suitable use
of local variables (like `len`) and comments to clarify explicit behaviour.

And for those of your saying "just use `strrchr`" that would be the cleanest way
but this example is contrived.

#### Clean code is written in a logical order

I know it sounds lame, but your code should read like a bit of prose should.
That is, you should start by setting up your characters and plot elements (your
classes and functions) such that the reader can understand them in isolation.
Then, expand on them with more "plot" (functions) that builds on the existing
"plot". Finishing in a concise conclusion which brings everything together (this
could be a `main()` method or `render()` method, for example).

#### Clean Code is easy to keep in your head

A programmer can only keep about 100 lines of code in their head at any one
point. Having to move away and look up some other method or class which isn't
clearly explained will reduce the likelihood of that programmer understanding
your code.

Splitting out large methods into steps, and making common operations into
methods with a good name and parameters will help lessen the cognitive load
needed to understand your code and make it more likely that it is understood.

#### Clean code is idiomatic

It can be too easy having learnt a specific style of languages to fall into
common patterns. Unfortunately these patterns may not be the cleanest and most
efficient for the language.

Just watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OSGv2VnC0go) from the
guy who oversees Python `collections` at how idiomatic Python is so clean.

#### Clean code should not have unexpected consequences

If a method changes the contents of a parameter you pass in, please be explicit
about it.

With the latest trend of functional programming being found in more and more
languages its too easy to assume that everything is a pure function - a function
that does not alter its inputs in any way, and always returns the same thing.

Being more explicit that your function has side effects will help others
understand the flow of data in your application.

#### Clean code still has comments (where they are needed)

There may be some gnarly bit of code which will only work that way but is hard
to read. You may have a public API to a service or library. You could be writing
some super optimised code (you shouldn't, you better have good reasons).

Comments are the most valuable thing to a programmer when trying to understand
some code, but programmers hate having to document their stuff because they
could be busy doing more _fun_ things.

If you practice clean code, you'll start to understand when you really need to
write comments and you will be thanked a thousand times over for doing so.

## Why should I practice clean code?

We've all come across managers and peers which say "Shipped code is always
better than unshipped code", which can lead some inexperienced software
engineers to push their code as soon as they get something working and moving on
to the next task.

So here are some of the benefits of taking your time to make your code clean:

### Clean Code gets your code reviewed faster

As a professional Software Developer, you will be working with other people who
will review your code. Most of the time they will have a very high level
understanding of the problem you are trying to solve when they are reviewing
your code. If you have code which explains what it is doing, with appropriate
steps split out into functions/methods/sub-routines/classes, that are easy
enough to understand your code reviews will move more swiftly.

I have personally had to tell inexperienced developers to clean up their code
because I just couldn't understand what they were trying to do. This then wastes
a day until I can get round to reviewing the, much cleaner, second revision.

### Clean Code saves everyone's sanity

[Clarke's Third Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clarke%27s_three_laws) states
"Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic." I would
state that "Any code that you cannot be understood is magic," and "Programmers
don't like magic."

You will always have to look at other people's code. This may be because its
giving you some obscure error that you are trying get rid of so you can go home
for the weekend, or its part of a problem in one of your production systems and
its part of your company's process to understand the root cause of all major
outages.

Being able to read code quickly and without putting too much strain on your
brain will mean you sleep more soundly at night.
