---
title: Tech Debt 💰
date: 2019-06-17T23:00:00Z
layout: layouts/post.njk
tags: post
---
## What is "tech debt"

[Martin Fowler] probably explains it a lot better on
[his blog](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TechnicalDebt.html) so you should
probably read him first before continuing

So here's my definition:

> _Technical Debt_ (or Tech Debt for short) is a collection of tasks to carry
> out work that was initially agreed upon but could not be carried out for
> various factors.
>
> The intent of Tech Debt is to correct workarounds, limitations and mistakes
> that have been required to launch a particular product or feature.

The debt analogy was coined by
[[Ward Cunningham](http://wiki.c2.com/?WardExplainsDebtMetaphor)] as a way to
understand the accumulation of these tasks. You may have a working product, but
Technical Debt can limit you in your ability to maintain and add new features.
Framing this as debt presents the benefit of "paying off" this quickly before it
accumulates and makes is harder to get rid of.

## Types of "debt"?

[Martin] even goes further in his articles in
[categorizing Technical Debt](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TechnicalDebtQuadrant.html)
into a 4 quadrant grid: Deliberate vs Inadvertent and Prudent vs Reckless.

Decisions in the _Deliberate-Prudent_ area come about from everyone coming up
with a plan to overcome a setback. For example, shipping with less features in
order to meet your ship date. I would argue that this is not debt at all since
in my experience tasks like missing features have high visibility and get will
get completed quickly as a result of normal work.

Decisions in the _Deliberate-Reckless_ area come about from a lack of knowledge
or respect for best practices. For example, skipping integration tests for your
code.

Decisions in the _Inadvertent-Prudent_ area come about from a lack of specialist
knowledge about a particular area. For example, using a NoSQL database over a
Relational one. Like _Deliberate-Prudent_ decisions, these are discussed and
agreed with the team but are harder to rectify since the better approach needs
to be learned first before applying it.

Decisions in the _Inadvertent-Reckless_ area come about from sheer inexperience
or ignorance. For example, "what's unit testing?"

That's a lot of different types of debt! Maybe we can come up with some better
names?

## The big ball of "debt"

In a post-credit crisis world, I think we can all agree that the world is not
good at handling its money so lets get away from the money analogy. Since we can
see there are different types of debt, we should be using different terms to
capture their severity and impact of not doing it.

### Missing Features are not debt

As I mentioned above, features that you didn't ship in the initial release will
get built because someone wants them. If no one wants them, why are you building
them? That being said, not being conscious of upcoming features and developing
an architecture that can handle them is likely to incur "debt".

### Fire Hazards

Fire Hazards capture the _Deliberate-Reckless_ and _Inadvertent-Reckless_ types
of "debt". Ignoring things like unit tests, integration tests, metrics, logging
and alarms will only cause you to spend more time putting out fires than
developing your product.

### Duck Tape

Duck Tape captures the _Deliberate-Prudent_ and _Inadvertent-Prudent_ type of
"debt". Duck Tape has been famously used in the Vietnam war to patch holes and
to create one-time use tools. It was probably Macguyver's favourite thing to use
after [the paperclip](https://www.google.com/search?q=macgyver+paperclip).

Likewise, Duck Tape in software are patches, workarounds, limitations which were
put in place in order to get your product shipped. You could also use this to
describe extremely messy or inconsistent implementations in your code.

These tasks are less important and less dangerous to ignore than Fire Hazards,
but you should try and get rid of as much as possible.

## Conclusion

Stop thinking debt, start thinking more physical! You should start thinking abut
your Tech Debt this way:

- _Fire Hazards_ which risk the availability and safety of your product.
- _Duct Tape_ which are limitations, workarounds or generally messy things in
  your product you should get rid of to help maintain quality and velocity.

The next time your team is talking about their "Tech Debt" process, consider
ways to categorise that debt and give them better names.
