---
date: 2019-06-17T23:00:00Z
author: Douglas Bouttell
title: Tech Debt 💰
---

## What is "tech debt"

[Martin Fowler] probably explains it a lot better on [his blog](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TechnicalDebt.html)
so you should probably read him first before continuing

So here's my definition:
> *Technical Debt* (or Tech Debt for short) is a collection of tasks whose 
goal is to correct workarounds, limitations and mistakes that have been 
required to launch a particular product or feature.

The debt analogy was coined by [Ward Cunningham](http://wiki.c2.com/?WardExplainsDebtMetaphor)
as a way to understand the accumulation of these tasks.  You may have a working product, but 
Technical Debt can limit you in your ability to maintain and add new code.
Framing this as debt presents the benefit of "paying off" this quickly before
it grows worse. 

## Types of "debt"?

[Martin] even goes further in his articles in [categorizing Technical Debt](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TechnicalDebtQuadrant.html)
into a 4 quadrant grid: Deliberate vs Inadvertent and Prudent vs Reckless.

Decisions in the *Deliberate-Prudent* area come about from everyone coming up with a plan to overcome
a setback. For example, shipping with less features in order to meet your ship date.  I would
argue that this is not debt at all since in my experience these tasks have high visibility
and get completed in a short amount of time. 

Decisions in the *Deliberate-Reckless* area come about from a lack of knowledge or respect
for best practices. For example, skipping integration tests for your code.

Decisions in the *Inadvertent-Prudent* area come about from a lack of specialist knowledge 
about a particular area. For example, using a NoSQL database over a Relational one.  Like
*Deliberate-Prudent* decisions, these are discussed and agreed with the team but are harder
to rectify since the better approach needs to be learned first before applying it.

Decisions in the *Inadvertent-Reckless* area come about from sheer inexperience or ignorance.
For example, "what's unit testing?"

That's a lot of different types of debt!  Maybe we can come up with some better names?

## The big ball of "debt"

In a post-credit crisis world, I think we can all agree that the world is not good at handling
its money so lets get away from the money analogy.  Since we can see there are different types
of debt, we should be using different terms to capture their severity and impact of not doing it.

### Missing Features are not debt

As I mentioned above, features that you didn't ship in the initial release will get built
because someone wants them.  If no one wants them, why are you building them?  That being said,
not being conscious of upcoming features and developing an architecture that can handle them
is likely to incur "debt".

### Fire Hazards

Fire Hazards capture the *Deliberate-Reckless* and *Inadvertent-Reckless* types of "debt".
Ignoring things like unit tests, integration tests, metrics, logging and alarms will only
cause you to spend more time putting out fires than developing your product. 

### Duck Tape 

Duck Tape captures the *Deliberate-Prudent* and *Inadvertent-Prudent* type of "debt".  Duck Tape has
been famously used in the Vietnam war to patch holes and to create one-time use tools.  It was
probably Macguyver's favourite thing to use after [the paperclip](https://www.google.com/search?q=macgyver+paperclip).

Likewise, Duck Tape in software are patches, workarounds, limitations which were put in place
in order to get your product shipped.  You could also use this to describe extremely messy or
inconsistent implementations in your code.

These tasks are less important and less dangerous to ignore than Fire Hazards, but you should
try and get rid of as much as possible.

## Conclusion
Stop thinking debt, start thinking more physical!  You should start thinking abut your Tech Debt
this way:

* *Fire Hazards* which risk the availability and safety of your product.
* *Duct Tape* which are limitations, workarounds or generally messy things in your
  product you should get rid of to help maintain quality and velocity.
  
The next time your team is talking about their "Tech Debt" process, consider
ways to categorise that debt and give them better names.